I'm Gary Stevenson, former trader, peoples economist,
this is Gary's Economics
Today we're gonna explain
What is wealth
When I was a kid, all the money my
family made was from my dad's job
when I got older and got a job myself in the city
all the money I made was from working myself
most ordinary families are like this
when they think about money, when they think
about wealth, its all work and job
but from working in the city what I
realised was, for very rich families
things are different, for them its not
about work at all, its about wealth.
Now wealth is not about what job
you do or how hard you work
wealth is about what do you own
now, i think for most of us
its so hard just to get a house
that we dont really realise
how much wealth there is in society
its not just about houses and flats you know
I live here near Canary Wharf
all of those big skyscrapers in the wharf
all of those big skyscrapers in the city
they're owned as well
and its not just the skyscrapers right
walk down the high street
the shopping centres - they're owned
the banks, the restaurants, the pubs, the bars
- everything is owned
OK you might be thinking
i don't know anyone who owns a skyscrapper
i dont know anyone who owns a shopping centre
and the reason for that is; unlike houses
where a lot of ordinary people do own some
all of this commercial wealth
this commercial property
the vast majority of it is owned by the
richest individuals and families in our society
So the point to make here is that theres a
huge amount of wealth that exists in the world
and i want you to think about this
next time you walk down the high street
look at all the shops, look at all the
restaurants, all the bars, all the pubs
and think to yourself
somebody owns this
all of the wealth that exists
is owned
But it actually goes deeper than that...
Because there are a lot of
things that ordinary people do own
ordinary people often own their own house
or the flat that they live in
but a lot of the time the only way they
are able to do that is through debt
now debt is like negative weallth
if you buy a flat for £200,000
and you borrow  £150,000
you actually only really own 25% of that flat
that loan doesn't come from nowhere
it comes from the bank and ultimately
the wealthy individuals who own that bank
so what that means is...
even the things which we do own
like our houses and the flats that we live in
often even those things are indirectly owned
by the wealthiest people in our country via
the debt that we had to take to buy them
Now this isn't just true for ordinary people
and ordinary families
this is true for the government as well
Now, when we're talking about the physical wealth
that exists in our cities and our country
there are a lot of things that are owned by the government;
the schools, hospitals, police stations, fire stations
but if we look at the data gathered
by French economist Thomas Piketty
He estimates that government debt is worth more than all of the wealth:
all of the schools, all of the hospitals, owned by the government
what that means is indirectly, via debt, the wealthy people
also own all of the schools and hospitals in this country
But it actually goes deeper than that still...
it's not just that the richest people
own all of the wealth in our society
they actually make a huge amount
of money just from owning that
and that money doesn't come out of nowhere
it comes from people like you and me
Now the most obvious example of that
is if you rent a house or rent a flat
You work, if you work here in London,
probably end of the month
a third of your pay goes straight toward paying the rent
and that goes to the owner of the house
if you own your own property the same
things gonna happen with your mortgage
The money doesnt disappear,
that money goes from you
to the person who owns the property
or the person who owns the mortgage
which in most cases
will be a wealthy person
OK but this isn't just the case for property
this happens every single time you spend money
when you pay your bills, that money is going towards
the owners of the energy and gas companies
and the owners of those natural resources
when you go to the supermarket to buy your groceries
that money doesn't all go to the workers in the supermarket
a big chunk of it goes towards the owner of the supermarket
and the owner of the building the supermarket is in
when you go to work in an office
a big chunk of the money you make is going
towards the owners of the office building
every single time you spend money
every single time you make money
a big chunk of the money is going from
you to the owners of all that wealth
Its easy for us not to think about this kind
of money that comes from owning wealth
because for most of us we get
our money from working a job
the richest people, they get most of their money from this
wealth income, income that comes from the things that they own
and the size of it can be enormous
for somebody who has a wealth of £2million
they can make an income of about £60,000 every year
just from the wealth that they own, that is enough
to live a pretty good life for an ordinary family
but very wealthy individuals can make a lot more
somebody who has £10million
they will probably make, every single year, £300,000
just from the things they own, without having to get out of bed
now once we start talking about super super rich people
if you have just £1billion, you will make every year
£30 million - just for the wealth that you own. If we look at
Jeff Bezos who has an estimated wealth of 200 billion Dollars
this guy if he makes just a 3% return on his wealth
hes gonna make every single year 6 billion Dollars
6 Thousand Millions Dollars!
What i want you to be able to realise is
whilst we are out here working for our money
these super rich people, they're making tens, hundreds,
even billions of pounds or dollars every single year
without working at all. Just from
the money they earned from this wealth
& its important to realise like i have said,
that money is not coming from nowhere
that money is coming from the money that you and I spend
Recently the wealth of the richest people in our society
not just the top 1% but the top 0.1% or 0.01% - has exploded
these guys get a massive amount of income every year
from their wealth - tens/hundreds of millions of pounds
ordinary people like you and me they spend pretty much
all the money they make over the course of their life
but im agine you're Jeff Bezos and hes making every single
year 6 billion Dollars (six thousand million dollars)
which is, i dunno, 20 million Dollars a day
or something, he cant spend all of that money
this tells you something important about the difference
between ordinary people and the super rich
ordinary people spend the money they make
whereas the super rich save the money they make
so what does it mean if the super rich are getting richer
and richer and richer & that money is coming from us
well we would have spent it & they're gonna save it
so if they're getting richer and richer and richer
they're taking more money out of the system
more and more and more money is being saved
in a strong economy thats not necessarily a bad thing, they can save
that money, invest it into growing businesses, the economy can grow
but when we have a weak economy, like what
we've had definitely since 2008
the companies dont wanna invest and they dont wanna grow
so it creates a problem right,
these super rich guys are making huge amounts
of money every year from their wealth
and they cant invest it, so what are they gonna do?
well if they can't invest it, there is 1 other thing they can do
They can buy your mum's house!
so that is what happens in a weak economy
that is very unequal
the rich own all of the wealth, that means they generate a massive
amount of cashflow from the rest of us every single year
they can't invest it because the economy isn't growing
so instead they use that money to buy wealth from the rest of us
to buy our houses for example and that is why you're
seeing my generation (younger people) are unable to get houses
when our parents generation were able to get them
Because we are gonna have to compete
with the huge amounts of income from the super rich
who wanna buy the houses aswell
thats why we've seen houses in this country go up from
2-3 times the average wage to 20-30 time
but what does that mean is gonna happen?
if the rich are getting more and more income
and they're using it to buy our wealth
well thats means next year the rich are gonna get even more income
from us which they're gonna use to buy even more of our wealth
and the year after that they're gonna get even more income from
us which they're gonna use to buy even more of our wealth
when i say wealth, i'm talking about things that we need
like houses we need to raise our families
what happens is, is you enter a really negative spiral
where the working people give all their income every year to the rich
and the rich use that income to buy
the wealth from the working people
which means the rich get richer and richer
and ordinary people get poorer and poorer
I'm not just saying that this is gonna happen
I've been betting on this for over 10 years now
and i've been right for 10 years
I've made millions of pounds betting on this...
and it's gonna happen
it's happening right now
So that's really important to understand
Income is about work
whereas wealth is about ownership of things
the ownership is super super unequal-
the rich own almost all of the wealth in society
that means a huge amount of money
gets transferred from ordinary working
people to the rich every year
they use that money to buy our stuff
that makes us poorer
this cycle is gonna get worse and worse and worse unless
we do something about it, so what do we have to do?
the big problem here is that the money that
you and me make from working gets taxed differently
to the money that the super rich make from their wealth
our money when we work it gets taxed at source
we have to pay that tax
but rich people they get their money in different ways
capital gains, inheritances, trusts...
these methods of getting income, income you get from wealth
its much much easier to avoid taxes
when you get your income in that way
if we allow that to happen it is inevitable that more and more wealth
is gonna get transferred from workers to these super rich families
that is gonna mean that ordinary workers in the future
are not gonna be able to afford houses
and if you go and look at the really unequal places
in the world, look at Mumbai, look at Hong Kong
or go look at what England was like a 100 years ago
and it was much more unequal
in those spaces ordinary working people,
working families can't buy houses
unless we do something about this inequality, unless we make sure
the super rich at least pay the same rate of tax that the rest of us pay
that is our future, our future's gonna be a space where
all of our money goes on just paying for the basics of life
and we can never own houses
and the super rich... own houses
what that means is if you were born poor you will die poor
and if you were born rich you will die richer
for me, that's not the kind of future i wanna live in
so that's why i am making these videos
my ultimate message is we need to find a way to make sure
the super richest start contributing back to society
So look, thats the message of this video - it's super important
to understand the difference between wealth and income
and money people make from working vs money that
super rich families make just from owning all the stuff
You know when i go out there and
talk about we need to tax the rich more
people sometimes ask me what is rich?
is it someone who makes £80,000 a year?
is it someone who makes £100,000 a year?
This shows...
a lack of understanding on the
difference between wealth and income
because i'm not talking about taxing working people, what i want
is for working people to be able to make money and buy houses
but we need to make sure we tax the super rich families
who are making massive amounts of income from us
and using that to buy our houses
if we don't do that houses are not gonna be affordable for working people
houses are not gonna be affordable for future generations
and that will mean future generations cannot
get financial security to raise a family
so we need to look beyond just taxing working people
and start looking at taxing the super rich families
who might have a £100million
or like Rishi Sunak's family over a £1billion
because they're generating a huge amount of income
every year and they are not paying their bit
instead they're using that money to push up
house prices - which is affecting our future
If you wanna know what you can do to help make this happen
we are gonna talk about that more in the next video
for now:
like, comment, share, subscribe.
Lets make this a thing!
Thank You